When I was married to you, the faculty complained that some students, after they took their third quiz, stopped coming to class.
That's probably true.
Yes.
I don't question that.
I probably would have done the same thing as an undergraduate.
I found in my classes that if I gave a quiz to graduating seniors only fairly late, I could keep them coming a little later.
I always thought the faculty should have been clever enough to deal with that.
Let's see, did you ever, the Williams sense of humor, do you remember any examples of that?
Mostly by legend, and I think
one of the things that made Dr. Williams and General Rutter so
almost bigger than life in many respects, is that there were lots of stories told about both of them.
Lots of faculty members.
When we first came here, Rutter was here, and faculty members used to spend an inordinate amount of time at parties and so forth discussing what does Rutter really want.
Is he going to run for governor?
Or actually, usually for the Senate.
Does he want to be Secretary of the Army?
What does he really want?
I know now from talking to Mrs. Rutter, what he really wanted was to be President of Texas A&M.
But Dr. Williams, too.
And I think that it's good
for a president one of the things that starts these rumors if they get mad at the right things they can have they can just absolutely blow up and word gets around campus and if it's the right reason to blow up it can do them some good it can be helpful the dr williams temper was pretty legendary his he was a beautiful public speaker uh he was
And Ed, I don't know if Ed told you this or not, Ed Cooper says that he lied frequently when people would ask him for copies of his speeches.
He would insist that he didn't have a copy.
Oh, that was just a few thoughts I had.
It wasn't written out.
Ed says he would have worked on the speech off and on for a week, and there would be several edits of it.
But there were, actually, there were stories about them.
People...
It's been an awful lot of time, and I just don't see that.
I haven't seen that.
Did you have the impression that the turnaround time on important items in the Williams office was fast or slow?
Oh, very fast.
Almost incredibly fast.
Why?
I agree with you.
Why do you think it was fast?
Things were far more authoritative then.
Not everything had to be studied by four committees and approved.
Dr. Williams, and this is something else that Williams and Rutter had in common, they had the personal self-confidence to make a decision.
And they had the
For the most part, obviously influence of presidents with the board, Waxes and Waynes, but the personal self-confidence, they were their own men, and I think the regents recognized it.
And I think they both had very effective staffs.
Nelda?
Oh, yeah.
Nelda and Hillary, both very effective.
At least, and I've talked about this with a friend who was involved.
We had some extremely able administrators in.
Whether you agreed with them or whether you didn't, whether you liked them or whether you didn't, he wasn't the only able administrator on campus.
Who were some of those others?
Well, the conversation I've had with my friend Randy Mattson was comparing, say, the deans back in the mid-'70s as a group.
They were an extremely able group of people, again, with personal self-confidence, with the ability to make a decision.
Yes, they were reviewed, but the review was different.
They were able to stay dean long enough to see the results of some of the things they had done.
And what Randy and I ask ourselves,
did we think they were so able, was it a reflection of our age at the time and the age difference compared to now when they're our peers in the same?
I don't think that was, that may be part of it, but I don't think that was all of it.
But the folks I'm talking about, I mean you had, not just the deans, but you had Tom Cherry in business, you had John Calhoun,
The deans, gee, people like Fred Benson, Frank Hubert, Mac Prescott, Earl Cook, John Pearson, I mean, just go right down the line.
And they were decisive.
They were, to some extent, argumentative from time to time.
I think they were a pretty able group.
I agree with you and I think also they knew that the person in the leadership hierarchy above them was a decision maker and that they might send a recommendation up there and a decision would be made and that was it.
It wouldn't bounce around a long time.
a couple of observations though by watching these things happen anytime you change at whatever level if you change dean if you change vice president if you change president the first six months they're going to see an awful lot of really bad ideas that have already been turned down once or twice
that people will say okay we've got a new one let's run this back through again maybe we'll get to prove uh and it's and that's really pretty silly when you consider that for the most part the staff that work at each of these levels they don't turn over and they point this out uh i guess the other observation is at that point deans were not always named by search committees
I don't know of any evidence whatsoever and can think of only one really good reason why a search committee does a better job than an individual in hiring someone.
I don't know that anyone's ever done any sort of study on it or anything else.
You can make mistakes doing it either way, but I think search committees generally tend to go to a blander person.
I think so, and I think also search committees suffer
from not feeling any responsibility for the consequences of their decision.
Whereas if it's an individual making that decision, he or she knows that if the appointment goes wrong, it's going to hurt there.
They're going to be judged.
Right.
By what kind of staff they've built.
Now, also during that period, do you think it was helpful that
that Earl Rudder and Jack Williams were president of both the institution and of the system.
Yes, but everything was on a smaller scale.
Sure.
Very definitely it did.
Jimmy Bond put that succinctly one time.
He said, Mary Helen, he said it was so much more fun when we all worked for Jack Williams.
He said because we knew we'd better get along.
That if we didn't get along with each other, we knew there was only one tiebreaker.
and we were both going to look bad if he had to break a tie.
So we better figure out a way between ourselves to make it work.
And he was right.
Things didn't escalate.
Under the present setup, and I've believed this for some time, with a chancellor symbolically at least across the street and a president here, if I were either one of those people,
I would tell my staff that I don't care what anyone at the other level does.
You will not criticize them to your staff.
I don't care what happens.
You won't do it.
If you want to criticize them, you criticize them to me.
But most of these things that get blown up into big deals start at a fairly low level, don't really matter anyway.
And by the time they keep moving up the level, they just get blown all out of proportion.
And maybe it's not possible for a chancellor and a president to really get along well, but that sure doesn't help.
During those years when you were in admissions, were there any admission changes that were made that were important?
Well, in the 70s, in the late 70s, enrollment at Texas A&M grew almost exponentially.
We were adding several thousand new students per year.
Vast overcrowding, literally as well as figuratively.
We had chemistry majors who got us, we were teaching chemistry labs on, freshman chemistry labs on Friday nights.
We were told to hold down enrollment.
It was sort of mind-boggling.
Sometimes I would go from one meeting to work on a publication to recruit students, and then I'd go to a meeting that same afternoon on how to hold down enrollment.
The only ways you could hold down enrollment at that point, because the admissions standards were pretty cut and dried, 800 SAT, top half-year class.
I mean, that was it.
Everybody got in if you had that.
So the only way you could control the total was on international students, and those were the biggest part of your new graduate students, and out-of-state students.
And so the out-of-state enrollment kept getting higher and higher, or pardon me, the standards, the requirements.
And that had kind of a negative effect because when you had a undergraduate student body with an average SAT score probably of about 1030, and you had out-of-state students who had to have a minimum 1150 on the SAT, the faculty all started thinking that the out-of-state kids were smarter than the Texas kids and better prepared.
No, they just had to meet a higher standard to get in.
So that was a thing.
Later they came in with some other ways to do it.
Obviously we haven't found the right way to do it.
I've always thought that as a fundraising thing, and I say this only partially, facetiously, that go through all of the things about the review and all of this and the subjective and the objective and this sort of thing, and then leave a hundred places at the end.
that on the July 4th or whatever day you want to pick, you auction them off.
They just go to the highest bidder.
And why not?
I lost a lot of faith in the process that we use now.
In a meeting about five years ago,
with it was a committee working on ways to improve the core implementation committee that had a blue ribbon committee what needed to be done I was on the implementation committee we had a year about five six years ago when all of a sudden about mid-july they realized that the enrollment wasn't going to reach their target it wasn't they were going to be over it wasn't going to reach it so they started getting on the phone and calling
people who had been turned down to see if they were to come to A&M.
Well, they didn't get too many from that.
Primarily because kids had been turned down, they'd already gotten accepted somewhere else, told all their friends they were going somewhere else, you know, didn't want to go back and say, well, I just barely got in A&M.
But one of the kids that was called
had expressed interest in the corps cadets and he was called his mother answered the phone they said that they would like to he could now be accepted a m and so forth and his mother said well i'm sorry he was not interested he's been accepted to the united states military academy and we sat in one of those meetings and the folks from admissions
tried to tell us that they were looking for something different than West Point was.
And I had to bite my tongue to keep from saying, would you please name one thing that you were looking for that West Point is not?
Now, I realize that a mistake can be made, and they'd have been far better off to say, hey, this is one we just screwed up on.
You know, we made an error.
Clerical era, misread, you know.
So I think it's kind of like reading tea leaves for the students in the middle.
For the sake of this question, you have the power of the emperor.
You don't have to explain anything to the voters.
What would you have as the enrollment admission total?
How large would you have the student body here?
Undergraduate.
Never thought about that.
I don't think it is too big.
And Haskell, as long as we keep getting as many kids as we get, as long as there are that many neat, sharp kids, I'd probably let in a few more.
Right.
Now, would you agree with me in my personal opinion that
total enrollment has almost nothing to do with reputation of quality.
Oh, no.
That I totally agree with you.
Because I've run into a number of people who think, oh, it would hurt our reputation if we went up or down.
I've tried to say, no, no, no.
And I always ask them, which one is better, Michigan or Michigan State?
Michigan.
Which one's bigger?
Michigan?
No.
Michigan State's.
Well, and it would, it's going to hurt, as big as we are, it's going to hurt if we
if we get bigger or stay big, because we'll never be able to get the faculty-staff ratio down, and that counts on a lot of the rating things that come out by different magazines to sell books.
So that would be a problem.
And if we went smaller now, politically, it would be extremely difficult.
It would be disastrous.
Because in Texas, there is still that kind of idea that, after all, I'm a taxpayer, I'm a citizen, therefore...
But as long as you're talking about enrollment and admission as a political thing, it's a shame that Bill Hobby, because I think he was given evidence of having the nerve, didn't stay as a dollar a year chancellor a little longer.
I personally believe that the Hopwood thing has been very poorly handled.
And I think we are making a huge mistake to let the best and brightest of our minority kids go out of state to school.
I mean, I think it's... And so far, mostly what we've done is have meetings and pay lip service to doing something about it.
There wasn't a university president in the state that had the guts to say, no, we're not going to do it.
Back in your real world days, let's go back again, do you remember any good anecdotes about admissions, somebody that didn't get admitted, pressure brought to bear, this sort of thing?
You don't have to name names.
Always, always.
from my hometown.
I brought the pressure to bear.
There were twins.
My mother had taught them in high school.
One of them made an 800 on the SAT and the other one made a 780 on the SAT.
They got, one of them got turned down, the other one got accepted.
I went into Cooper, after mother called me, I went into Cooper and said, my mother said for me to tell you, she taught both these boys high school English, and she's taught other kids who went to A&M that these boys can do A&M work.
And they did.
They both graduated.
And they got admitted.
Yeah, they hadn't realized they were twins.
I mean, you know, they didn't mean to do that.
There were always...
Every year, I mean, I remember the kid from Corpus.
I always used to end up, kids from South Texas always knew somebody who knew me.
Kid from Carpus that we had to work on because you couldn't hold your dorm room until you had the right score on the SAT and had to work with him to get him to hold his dorm room.
Kid came in here as a petroleum engineering major, had to take the SAT three times to get in.
And I kept up with him the first couple of years.
And he'd stop by to see me occasionally, but I watched his grades.
He wasn't a gangbuster student, but he was passing.
And I ran into him.
I'd see him every once in a while on campus.
Ran into him the semester he graduated.
It took him five years to graduate.
When I saw him, it was a couple of weeks before graduation, he grabbed me and hugged me, told me he was graduating that semester, how proud his folks were.
And he looked me in the eye and he said, you didn't think I'd ever get a degree in petroleum engineering, did you?
And I said, Sonny, I sure didn't.
He said, my daddy didn't either.
But he said, I've proved that I can do it.
And it was just through hard work and digging that kid made it.
There were other kids.
We still have kids here who are the first person in their family to go to school and who A&M is five, six, ten times bigger than their hometown.
And sometimes they need a little help.
I've often wondered if it wouldn't be worthwhile to have a special summer program only for students that are potential admittees and start it and run it about 12 weeks and to say okay that includes real math and real English and if you take come to summer school if you can handle that
with these grades, we will admit you.
Because I think that the ones that did survive, the incentive of working harder might make the difference, that they might not have worked as hard in high school as they could have.
Well, the provisional program, I don't know for sure how it works now, but it used to be similar to that.
And you had that you could offer.
Ed had a good way of telling people that it wasn't, you weren't doing a kid a favor by meeting them if you didn't really believe they could graduate.
That the flunking out, you know, wasn't going to do it.
The ones that I dealt with primarily then were the kids who had gotten just so far messed up in the system, somehow just totally messed up in the system, and get to troubleshoot more or less.
I kind of enjoyed that.
It was an interesting place to work.
How often were you aware of an attempt to pull a string by a regent or a legislator?
All the time.
It worked everywhere except veterinary medicine.
And who would those, would it normally be a phone call or a letter?
Phone call.
To whom?
Depends.
It might be to Buckwires.
It might be to the president.
It might be to Ed.
It might be to whoever.
But it happened.
It happened more on housing than it did on admission, or as much on housing at that point.
Did you find them a room on campus?
Oh, yeah.
But it happened.
Are you saying that in almost every case, if a regent or a legislator called, it worked?
At least to some extent.
They couldn't keep them here, but they could get them in.
I remember one time telling, again this was Dr. Miller, telling Dr. Miller that though that one of the regents, a regent stepson wasn't going to graduate.
This was two days before graduation.
And Dr. Miller said, thank you for telling me.
I'll call him and tell him.
And he said, gee, it'd be easier if it was his son instead of his stepson.
But I mean, it couldn't, it didn't go any further than getting him admitted.
Now it went to perhaps a little babysitting.
It went to a little encouragement.
But it didn't, to the best of my knowledge, it never got to an individual professor or anything like that.
All right, back to Jack Williams.
Were you aware of his declining health before he has his heart attacks?
No.
I wasn't either.
And when that happened, to me, it was kind of unexpected.
Oh, yeah.
Then we had, let's see.
And very secretive.
Right.
And, let's see, Clyde Freeman.
Was interim.
The interim.
And then Dr. Miller was appointed.
Do you remember any particular reaction in the office where you worked of his selection?
Oh, total surprise.
Complete surprise.
It was a selection that had pretty much come out of nowhere.
And whom did you all think it would be?
Well, I had heard Jack Williams say,
that he told the academic council, and these are going to be my words, but they're going to be very close, because I was shocked at it at the time.
He said that even though he was going to be chancellor and they were going to name a president, that things were going to keep running as they had been, that there wouldn't be any real change as far as deans and department heads saw it.
He more or less told them that he thought he was going to be Calhoun.
In the back of my mind at the time, I'm thinking, why would they make a change and keep it the same?
If they just want to give everybody a promotion, you wouldn't go through this.
But I don't know.
There was one that I was hoping it wouldn't be.
Do you remember any particular reaction of your colleagues to the surprise of Dr. Miller's selection?
Not really.
Did anything change over in admissions and records with his becoming the president?
No, not really.
And Prescott the vice president?
As far as how Admissions and Records ran, from our point of view, really not.
They, I think they both had confidence in Cooper, and from our point of view, things kept going much the same way.
And in, let's see, in Admissions and Records, Bill Lay was
Director of Admissions, and Bob Lacy was Registrar, which means the record keeper, the grade keeper.
And then when I first started there, Bob Logan was Director of Financial Aid, and Austin Curley was Student Counseling, and were part of our little group.
And they all worked well together, didn't they?
For the most part, for the most part.
uh would you be interested at this point in an anecdote about dr williams oh yes yes yes there was a woman who worked in admissions and records who worked there for probably 40 years at the time named caroline mitchell she was the only person on campus literally that i was scared of petrified of her she miss mitchell handled transfer admissions
There was a young woman who was transferring here who was a friend of the Williams family, who was staying with the Williams, and she had some problem with her transfer for the spring semester.
She saw Miss Mitchell.
Miss Mitchell ends up, and the kid ended up saying, well, I don't understand.
And Miss Mitchell said, of course you don't understand.
You wouldn't have been admitted at all if you weren't a friend of Jack Williams.
and uh because the kid's been to see the department or something came back and they you know i don't understand so miss mitchell told him the kid goes home at lunch and reports this about 3 30 that afternoon when dr williams hears about it it's raining it's january it's cold dr williams walks from
what is now the Jack K. Williams Building, to the Koch Building in the rain.
He walks into the Koch Building, up the stairs to the second floor, where Miss Mitchell's office was, walked into the room, and her office was a cubicle.
The ceiling didn't go all the way to the top.
They said that he was dripping off his raincoat, rain dripping.
He stood there and he realized that anything he said to her was gonna be heard by probably 20 people who were in the larger area.
He wheeled around, walked down the stairs, walked into the main office of Admissions and Records, past the counter area, the receptionist, didn't stop at Cooper's secretary's office, walked directly into Ed's office, and proceeded to spend the next hour chewing Ed out about what Caroline had done.
Finally left.
Ed told his secretary that night, he said, by noon tomorrow, Caroline or I-1 will not be working here.
He got in the next morning.
Ed usually got to the office about by quarter after 8.
He got in the next morning by about 7.30.
And Miss Mitchell usually got in about five or ten minutes after 8.
The phone rang at 10 minutes of 8, and it was Dr. Williams on the phone.
Ed, I owe you an apology.
I just really took it out on you yesterday.
I'd had a bad day and a bad week, and that just hit me wrong.
Ed, I am so lucky to have good people like you working for me that will let me blow off steam that way, and a good enough friend that can do that.
Ed, I appreciate what you do.
You're just doing a wonderful job.
And they were both still employed by noon.
Now the sad part about it is I'm not sure anyone told Miss Mitchell anything about it.
I bet you're correct.
Because Ed was about half scared of her too.
Because to me as a faculty member and then as a bureaucrat, she was a very intimidating person.
I always thought she gave very definite yes or no answers.
And that answer was, once she gave it, that was it.
It was not good.
Now, I learned not long ago, and I hope this is not at all inappropriate for this recording, about her two almost marriages.
I only knew of one.
Her first husband-to-be was killed in World War II on the Western Front.
wedding dresses, date, and everything, they'd already set tentative.
Her second, some years later, after the war, her husband-to-be has a heart attack on Thursday before the wedding day, Saturday, and dies the morning of the wedding day.
Oh, I'd never heard that.
And that the recent auction of her furnishings and all, that Brooks Cofer, the lawyer,
she had directed him to dispose of the two wedding dresses.
She didn't want those sold or given to anybody.
He was to destroy those.
And that the, I believe in the second, the wedding, she had the wedding rings even.
And in her attic and so forth.